# zAMExplorer
zAMPExplorer is an interactive Shiny application designed to facilitate the downstream analysis of outputs generated by the [zAMP pipeline](https://zamp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) . zAMP itself is a comprehensive DADA2-based bioinformatics pipeline for processing 16S rRNA gene amplicon metagenomic sequences, offering convenient, reproducible, and scalable analysis from raw sequencing reads to taxonomic profiles. The output of zAMP is a phyloseq object, which serves as the input for zAMPExplorer.

zAMPExplorer enables users to perform a wide range of microbiota and statistical analyses, including compositional barplot, relative abundance heatmap, community diversity (alpha diversity), community similarity through unsupervised (NMDS/PCoA) and supervised (RDA) ordinations, and community typing (or clustering) of microbial profiles using Dirichlet Multinomial Mixtures (DMM). All of these analyses are made accessible through an intuitive graphical interface, bridging the gap between complex command-line bioinformatics processing and user-friendly data exploration.


## Prerequisites and installation

### Prerequisites

- **Operating system**: Windows, macOS, or Linux
- **R**: Version 4.0 or later
- **RStudio**: Recommended for running the Shiny app
- **zAMP**: zAMPExplorer is designed to work with output generated from the zAMP pipeline.

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/metagenlab/zAMExplorer.git
   ```
2. **Navigate to the project directory**:
   ```bash
   cd zAMExplorer
   ```
3. **Install dependencies**:
   Run the provided `Dependencies.R` script to install all necessary R packages:
   ```r
   source("Dependencies.R")
   ```

4. **Launch the app**:
   After installation, launch zAMPExplorer with:
   ```r
   shiny::runApp("path_to_your_app")
   ```


## Overview of the interface

zAMPExplorer is divided into several tabs, each dedicated to a specific type of analysis:

- **Upload Data**: Upload your `phyloseq` object here. This object is the output of the zAMP pipeline and serves as the input for all downstream analyses in the app.
- **Reads and Taxa Overview**: Visualize the total number of reads per sample and the estimated number of organisms in each sample at different taxonomic levels.
- **Compositional Barplot**: Create interactive barplots to visualize the relative abundance of taxa within your samples.
- **Heatmap**: Generate heatmaps to visualize the relative abundance of taxa across samples and sample groups.
- **Alpha Diversity**: Analyze and visualize alpha diversity metrics, comparing diversity within groups.
- **Beta Diversity**: Explore beta diversity using different distance matrices to assess similarities/differences in microbial communities between samples.
- **Shared Core Taxa (Venn Diagram)**: Identify and visualize core taxa shared across different groups.
- **Community Typing (DMM)**: Perform community typing using Dirichlet Multinomial Mixture models to infer the optimal number of community types inside the dataset.
- **RDA Plot**: Perform redundancy analysis (RDA) to explore the association between your samples and explanatory variables.


## Troubleshooting and FAQ

### Common issues

- **Issue**: App fails to launch.
  - **Solution**: Ensure all dependencies are installed by running `source("Dependencies.R")`.

- **Issue**: Plots are not displaying correctly.
  - **Solution**: Verify your R version is 4.0 or later and that all necessary libraries are installed.

### FAQ

- **Q**: What file types can I upload?
  - **A**: zAMP Explorer supports `.rds` files containing `phyloseq` objects.

- **Q**: How do I update the app with new features?
  - **A**: Pull the latest updates from the GitHub repository, or fork the project and make changes to your fork.
